This is September 29, 1981. This is Terry
Anderson. This is an interview with General
Ludeke in College Station, testing.
Let's start in now. This is an interview with Major
General Ludeke. Today is the 29th of September,
1981. Let's start with your early life. You were
born the 1st of October, 1910, in El Dorado, Texas.
And could you, let's start by talking about your
parents. Could you tell me about your heritage,
your background, where your parents came from? My
father's father, my grandfather,
was born in New Orleans off parents who had
immigrated from Germany.
And he married a girl whose parents had immigrated
at approximately the same time from
Czechoslovakia. And they came to
by way of
several places that I'm not familiar with in New
Orleans and ended up in East Texas at Lockhart. And
it was there that my father was born. And he moved
when he was approximately 14 out to Stanford,
Texas, and when he was approximately 17 down to El
Dorado.
And it was there that he married my mother, Lizzie
Octavia Smith. whose
father and mother came to Texas from Tennessee and
settled mainly in Coke County. My mother and
father met in San Angelo, or near San Angelo, and
were married in El Dorado in 1909. And then I was
born five miles from El Dorado in 1910.
Could you tell me about their education? Their
education was limited to the sixth and seventh
grades and they had no further formal education
than that. What did your father do? What type of
occupation? My father was a stockman farmer. He
would have loved to have been a big rancher, except
he didn't have the resources to become one. And so
he had to satisfy himself by participating in
ranching with other people and by operating a
stock farm. So in addition to peripheral type of
ranching, we raised cotton feed and worked the
farm
as farms were operated in those days with no
machinery. So the principal staple crop was
cotton, although we raised Cattle, horses,
mules, hogs, other things that it took to provide
food and try to provide enough money to keep the
family together. And how many were in the family? I
was the oldest of eight. No kidding, eight? Eight,
the youngest having been born while I was a
freshman here at A&M. No kidding. That's quite a
spread of about 20 years. Yes it is. All of those
except one are still in fine shape and living and
have their own families and going about their own
business. When you say he was a stockman farmer,
what exactly does that mean? Was he a tenant farmer
then? Well, he was a tenant part of the time,
although most of my life he owned his own place.
When I say stockman farmer, I mean by that that you
have a place where you have a farm and you have the
stock necessary to work the farmers, horses,
mules, and so forth. And you have some cattle,
sheep, or other animals that you're raising,
trying to make money by having. Like a stock farm,
you could, I don't associate a stock farm with
selling farm products. I associate that with
selling stock. that you have kept by the products
from the farm, the feed and things of this nature.
So this was both. He raised feed for livestock and
fed livestock and sold the livestock, but he also
raised cotton and wheat and other products that
were sold directly as such. And how many acres did
he have? Well, it varied from...
640 square miles
down to as low as 240. The
last place that he owned of his own was 240 acres.
And did he use tenant farmers, too, for the cotton?
No, he did his own. He did his own what? He and I and
the rest of the kids We all worked on the farm. So he
didn't use either tenants nor migrants? No. Well,
in the earlier days, for picking cotton, he used
migrants. Pickers, all right. But other than
that, no, he didn't use them.
Later, of course, machines took the place of even
cotton pickers. But he used them during the time,
at least, that I was involved. What kind of person
was he? Can you tell me about his character? Yes, I
certainly can. My dad was, of course, a wonderful
man like other people's dads. He was quite young as
compared
to me as a father, because he was not quite 19 when I
was born. And
so in a sense, I grew up with him. But he was a rather
large man, 5'10", 180 or 190 pounds. A very
physically strong man. And also, in a stubborn
German way, a very strong-minded.
Strong-willed? A strong-willed man. And
so as a kid growing up and trying to
learn how to live in the world, I had some problems
living with him because he was very much a
perfectionist with German stubbornness, and he
expected out of me a
great deal. And I tried real hard to to make it. I'm
not sure whether I finally did or not. Was he an
authoritarian type? I'm sorry? Authoritarian?
Was he very authoritarian? Yes, quite. And stern?
Very, yes. I don't mean by that that he was a crank or
anything. He was a lot of fun and enjoyed it and
enjoyed participating in all kinds of fun things.
But he was very, very stern and worked to establish
principles that were fully enunciated. There
wasn't any question about it. He expected to, and
did, live by them. He expected his family to live by
them. He expected other people that he associated
with to live by them, otherwise he didn't
associate with them. Now, was he the authority in
the family or in the household, or was your mother?
He was. Well, I have to moderate that a bit. They
were in their respective areas, but overall there
was no question about that. No. Can you tell me
about your mother? Yes.
My mother was a wonderful person. She was the
youngest of five children in her father's first
family, but he was married again and had seven more
children, so she was really one of twelve
children. And really in the middle, because she
was the last of the first group and was raised by her
older sister. There was no mother at that time. And
they were a very poor family and poor in an economic
sense. And her father was very much of an
entrepreneur, very
jack of all trades and not particularly good at any
of them. And he hauled his family around over West
Texas. and in one way or another established three
or four towns.
There may be some question in other people's minds
about whether they established them or not, but
Pontotoc and Kickapoo and
Caffer, I think, certainly established those.
He usually would find a way to be the postmaster,
and run a store, and maybe build a church. So he
worked on in that way. And the last place he lived
was the town he established. Town, unquote. just
west of El Dorado, between El Dorado and Ozona,
called Caffer. And he lived there until he died at
about 86 or something about like that. The
mother didn't get the education that she wanted to
get. There was no way to do it. And when she married
dad, she was 19. And so thereafter, of course, she
led the same life that he did and the one I just
talked about. But she was a very compassionate
woman, a very
great amount of common sense. and understanding
of human nature. And in the situation she was in,
she needed it all.
With that many children and those kind of economic
straits, why, it wasn't an easy life. Was religion
important in your family? Yes, religion was
important, although we didn't attend church
regularly and didn't
make too much of a fuss about it. We lived
pretty carefully under the religious
principles, and we actually were members of the
Baptist church. and attended when we could. Most
of the children were baptized in that. Some of them
went to other churches later on.
But we were very religious in what I think is a true
religious sense in accepting
the principles and the teachings of the Bible and
following them. We didn't make a lot of public fuss
about the thing or become big pillars in the church
at the time. Economically we couldn't afford it,
among other things, but it wasn't their nature
anyway. I was wondering if your father ever took a
position of leadership in the community. He did in
the ways that he could. He
was a member of the school board two or three times,
two or three different school boards that we used
when we had small
school districts. And later the county, when it
was all converted to county, he was there.
He helped the sheriff a number of times, on special
occasions as deputy, or when there was need, not as
an occupation.
And he was very active in all the elections, and
local, not national. as anybody else, I guess, in
the National, but I mean, his work was mostly for
local county offices. He never ran for election
himself? Oh, he ran one time for sheriff, and was
defeated. But that was quite late in
his life. But other than that one time he never did
know him and he never held public office. How did
you get along with all your brothers and sisters?
Fine.
They considered it more how did they get along with
me because I was the oldest.
Very, very well indeed. living the kind of life we
did, why it was necessary that I look after them,
physically look after them. We had to ride
horseback to school five miles from back every
day, for example, and the two just younger than I am
are girls. And
at the time my brother, who was still younger than
that, was big enough take on those kind of jobs, why
the situation was different and I was gone. So I had
a great deal of, had to accept a great deal of
responsibility for them, which I did. And
they understood it, appreciated it, and it's been
that way, so we've had no problem. You've had a very
successful career, rising to major general. I was
wondering in what way do you think that your
parents are responsible for that? My parents are,
as far as I'm concerned, directly responsible for
it in several ways. One of those was
their convictions and the strength of their
convictions. They felt if something was right,
they didn't have to have anything else to
recommend it. That was enough by itself.
They also felt that if you really wanted to do
something that was right, and you wanted to do it
good enough, you could find a way to do it.
And yet they were not disposed to a reckless
approach to that end, and certainly not to a
dishonest one to that end.
They also felt that of anything, I think when I was a
kid it was probably most important to me that they
taught that any time I had an opportunity to learn
something that I didn't know, it was worth
learning, whether I thought I needed it or not, or
whether I thought I would ever use it or not. And I
followed that. Sometimes it wasn't too easy. And I
swear, in retrospect, I don't think I ever learned
anything that some way I didn't use in a very
relatively short time after that, and was tickled
to death that I knew it. So I think that was an
important thing. But mainly it was the knowledge
of their desire that we do well and do it right. that
provided the motivation and the drive and the
stickability to get something done. Both of them.
Let's move to your education. Can you tell me about
your early education? Early education, I guess
first grade is the earliest that I went to a little
school in Slacker County called Bailey Ranch. And
it was a little school with one teacher. There were
eleven or twelve, I've forgotten which, students
or kids. And they ranged from the first grade to the
tenth grade. In my class in the first grade there
was one other boy, one other student who was a boy.
And I don't know how that teacher did it, but she
kept us quite busy from the time we got to school
until we left to go home, and still taught ten other
classes in the same room, all in the same room. And
we didn't find any time on our hands or any boredom
or anything else. We were busy and working and
learning. And I think we learned as much as first
graders anywhere else did, at least we certainly
held our own after that. Well, I went to that school
for two years, and in the meantime they had built
another school, same group, same district, same
purpose, but it was a bigger, nicer school with
better facilities. And so I went to that one a year
and a half, and then we moved so that I went to the
school in town, in El Dorado. for the rest of my
grade school and high school education, which
would have been the fifth on through the eleventh.
Until you graduated in 1928. Now what were your
favorite subjects while you were in school?
Well, I guess if I have to...
categorize them that way. I would have to say that
history was my favorite subject. I got the problem
though because I couldn't find any way when I was
about the ninth or tenth grade that I could ever
make a living making a difference how much I know
about history in that particular country. That is
a problem. I'd better concentrate a little more on
things other than history.
So I felt real comfortable with mathematics and
science projects, and so I took all of those in high
school that I could. And when I came to A&M, I took
chemical engineering. What type of student were
you? In high school? Well,
I was about
varied from
one to four in the class, I guess, at the top of the
class. So you were a hard worker? Well, yes, I was
pretty hard, but that period of time, those four
years that I was in high was also a very, very
difficult period for us economically as a family.
A
lot of times I'd get home from school by hurrying
around 4 or 4.30 I'd go down and relieve Dad on the
tractor in the field and plow until 11 or 12
o'clock. He'd come back and take over for me and I'd
go home and do my studying after that. And a good
many times I'd run that right on up until it was time
to go back to school and just go back to school. That
wasn't an everyday occurrence, but it was
certainly more than every week for quite a while.
And it kept my grades from being quite as good, I
think, as they would have been. On the other hand,
it sure as hell kept me out of trouble, too. You
didn't have time for any sports or activities, or
did you? Some, but not very many. I mean, not in the
sense that kids think of it now at all, not anything
like that. So you didn't have an opportunity to be
in any groups or clubs or organizations? Not in
high school. I played basketball.
I don't remember that there were any clubs at that
time. Most other kids were in the same boat that I
was. Did you consider yourself well liked or
popular in high school? In school you mean? Yes.
Not to set the world on fire or anything, but I think
people didn't dislike me. They admired some of my
qualities, and when they were in trouble, they
looked to me to help them out.
So,
I wasn't the high school hero or anything like
that. When you graduated from high school, Did you
have firm ideas of what you wanted to do, or were you
still sort of up in the air, or what did you think?
Well, if you had asked me then, I would have said I
had firm ideas of what I wanted to do. But I don't
honestly think, in retrospect, that anybody at
that age and in that circumstances really knows as
much as he thinks he knows about what he wants to do.
On the other hand, I feel it's good that they feel
that way. At least they're getting started doing
something. It doesn't leave you in this category
of, I've heard a lot about recently, of having to go
find yourself, which is about as ridiculous as
anything I can think of, offhand. So I thought,
yes, I came down here to A&M for a short course in the
summer.
used that as a means of checking into the school and
what it did. They were offering this new course in
chemical engineering and everybody said that was
the hardest course they had in this place. So I
thought that's what I'd like to try because the oil
companies were just really getting to the point
where they were needing that kind of help. You
could get a job if it got through. So when you
graduated from high school, then you had made up
your mind that you wanted to be an engineer. Yes.
Now, when you thought about being an engineer, did
you think of any other school besides A&M? Yes, I
thought of several,
particularly Texas University.
But after I came down here in the summer, between
the time I graduated, I didn't try to think about
anything else then, because I didn't think there
were any that held a candle to it. I think we have to
remember that at that time, your knowledge of what
this university did or that university did was
very much limited by comparison to what it is now.
The
school might enjoy a fine reputation in this or
that, but there would be a certainly limited
number of people who knew that.
somewhere in West Texas where there wasn't much
communication. And if we remember, radio had only
been available to homes a matter of five or six
years before that. It was fine to people that
didn't know very much about it. So one had to go and
look up the facts himself, if you could find them,
make up your own mind about it. And that's what the
trip down here did for me. Now, the fact that A&M was
a military institution, did that have any bearing
whatsoever on going to that school? Well, I wasn't
particularly anxious to be military at that
point. Had you ever had any contact with the
military before? No. No, not at all. Well, I had an
uncle who fought in World War II, and I heard all his
stories and whatnot, but other than that, no.
World War I. I'm sorry, World War I, yeah. But other
than that, I hadn't. And I didn't have any wild
desire about it. So you never thought about
getting an engineering degree at West Point or a
service academy? No, not at that time, no. But to
come to NL, well, of course, you couldn't come here
without being in the Corps. Sure, right. But even
if you could, I wouldn't have done it because I
couldn't see anybody passing up a wonderful
opportunity like that. So I would have been in the
Corps in any case. So you arrived in the summer of
1928? Yeah, September. Well, you took a short
course first in the summer. Well, that was only,
that's a farmer's thing. That's three days, I
think. Oh, I see. I don't consider, that just
afforded me an opportunity to be here and to check
into some things. One of the things that afforded
me the opportunity to do was contact a couple of
people who were here who could give me a job if I came
down here. And I did contact them, and they
indicated that maybe they could. They didn't have
anything right. They couldn't say absolutely
they will, but they would try. Well, of course,
that brings me to the next question. Your family
was basically poor. How could you afford to go to
college? I borrowed from my uncle. and who also
lived there in El Dorado, and who was sheriff there
for sixteen years. And he was a bachelor, didn't
have sons of his own. So he loaned me some money and
gave me some money. It went along, and then when I
got here, I worked for them. My senior year, when I
was here, I was my jobs were good enough that I was
able to go to school and more than make my way. And
then in the years following school I paid back the
money that I had borrowed earlier. Now what type of
jobs did you have while you were there? Well I was
here, well the first year
I mostly worked with the building grounds people,
which translates into pushing a real-type lawn
mower for 25 cents an hour. I
did some work in the power plant. Most of that
translates to shoveling coal, but there was some
other work in there, and most of that late at night.
during my freshman year, and of course I didn't get
rich doing that either. I had worked a little bit in
the student post office and a little bit in the
faculty post office, just when they needed extra
help in both cases, and a little bit in the fiscal
department during my freshman year. Again, that
odd time not to study things. So when I came back as a
sophomore, I got that job in the fiscal
department,
which started I think at seven o'clock in the
evening, and I usually get through by 9.30 or 10,
sometimes 11. So I had two to three hours of work in
the fiscal department. And I got more work in the
student post office, about half time in there
then. And then the next year, while both of these
jobs were increasing, I was the student
postmaster and handled the whole thing for the
last two years. So by that time you were in a fairly
decent financial situation? Doing reasonably
well, of course. The people looking at the money
that you get No.
You said before that your dad ran for sheriff and he
was a little bit interested
in politics. He was a Democrat like everybody was
in Texas at the time. Yeah, he was a Democrat. Let's
talk a little bit about his and then philosophy or
political philosophy? Were you moderates,
liberals, conservatives? What did you consider
yourself? I think we have to temper
almost anything with a recognition of the
communication situation back in those days. I
think one could say liberal or conservative
and it really wouldn't
measure
one's philosophy then.
My dad was just a straight Democrat. He had no room
for the Republicans or anybody else for that
matter. But the issues were so different. I don't
know what he would be if he were alive today. Well,
what did he feel about prohibition? He thought
that it would be a good idea if he could make it, as a
practical matter, make it go, but he didn't think
he could. And so he was against it. I mean, he was for
leaving things alone, not for the amendment. What
did you think about Franklin Roosevelt and the New
Deal? Well, at that time I was gone, and since that
was the height of the Depression I was kind of busy,
I'll tell you for sure. So, I really don't know. I
just don't know. He was very bitter about Hoover,
but I don't know whether that was just because
Hoover was a Republican or because he really had a
different kind of judgment on the economic
situation. Did your father ever, do you know, even
though you were gone, did your father ever
accepted any government aid during the New Deal?
No, absolutely not. He didn't go for that talk, not
any, in any form. He considered accepting aid as a
damned insult to his capabilities to make a living
for himself and his family. He wouldn't have
accepted one if he had been starving to death. Now,
what about your political philosophy? Well, I
grew up there as a Democrat. As a matter of fact,
when you mentioned that, I was thinking about a
time
when I was a little kid when there was a Republican
president elected, and I've forgotten which one
right now. But he threw out the postmaster. who was
a Democrat, and appointed a new postmaster, whom I
heard my dad say was a goddamn Republican.
And he was talking to a neighbor about this damn
Republican up there as a postmaster.
So we were going to go to town in a few days, and I went
with him once to the post office, because I wanted
to see this, this Republican.
So we, I went to the post office with my father, and
he knew the man of course, I didn't.
And he spoke to him, called him Stratkins, and we
talked for quite a little while there, and we got
out of the post office, I said, so I think he was a
pretty nice man. Dad said, well he's a fine man if he
just wasn't a damn Republican. But I had never seen
one, I don't know what the hell a Republican looked
like, you see. I was very surprised that they were
human and everything was fine.
I continued to be a Democrat on up until 10 or 12
years ago.
And now you're a Republican? Yes. When they come
out with the likes of McGovern as a candidate for
president of the United States, I can't stomach
that in any sense. And what did you think about
Lyndon Johnson as far as his programs? Well, about
his program,
I don't, I didn't like it. I knew Lyndon Johnson
pretty well. Had a good many occasions to do
business with him, government business.
And I have to admire a great many things about him.
But there's some things that I don't admire about
him, didn't admire about him.
I think he understood an awful lot better what made
Lyndon Johnson move than he did what made the
United States move on a long-term basis. I think
things that were important to Lyndon Johnson were
a little more important to him sometimes than the
good of his country, and I don't admire that on
anybody, no matter how expedient it might be for
the problem at hand. In other words, ever since
McGovern in 1972, you voted, you've been a
Republican. You betcha. And are you a member of the
Republican Party? Did you ever get active in
politics? Oh, yes. I'm a member of the Republican
National Committee.
I haven't been active in local politics,
but reasonably active in national politics.
that actually split ticket
in a local sense,
because the Republicans haven't put up the best
candidates in some of these places. And when I can
have a guy like Tiger Teague, who's a classmate of
mine, and I suppose everybody knows what he did and
what he stood for, Well, I'm going to arrange it so
that I can vote for him. I guess never anybody. OK.
Let's go back to A&M, then. Can you tell me, we
talked about your employment there. Can you tell
me about where you lived on campus for your four
years? How were the accommodations?
Well, I think in general, one would say that what we
thought were very good accommodations then would
be absolutely unacceptable. to the kids now, and I
can't tell you whether this is good or bad, but I
have my own notion about it.
When I entered school and entered the Corps, I was
assigned a D Battery or Field Artillery, which was
the newest unit organized that year.
And that battery was quartered in Foster Hall.
So I spent that year, freshman year, and sophomore
year in Foster Hall. And then the junior year, we
moved over and were in Puryear Hall, which was
brand new, just opened that year. and also a senior
year. I was in first year hall. So the
accommodations were pretty good for the time.
They were wonderful as far as I'm concerned for the
time. At that time there still were Hollywood, the
huts and all of that, and I had a lot of friends that
lived in them, spent a lot of time down there, and
they weren't too bad either. didn't like very
much, but they were all right. What was your
opinion of hazing? Well, I thought it was
wonderful actually. I realize
how it sounds to say that,
but I think it made people out of an awful lot of of
individuals who might not otherwise have
achieved that status. Well, what do you mean by
that? Could you continue? I mean, I think it made
for
a deeper understanding of many kinds of values,
including human values.
And it created an understanding of discipline,
not just discipline in a military sense, but
discipline of thinking and discipline of conduct
that
kids growing up don't have automatically and now
in most cases don't get. And I think it was good in
that sense.
It's true, I'm sure, that it can be abused. It was
abused and has been since. But I'm also quite
convinced that it isn't abused one-fifth as much
as people would have you believe it was abused.
Because the
thing was handled in such way within the Corps when
I was going up in it that if somebody, someone
abused it very much, they were called on the carpet
too, and they didn't get by with it. Little fringe
areas, yeah, but I don't think they ever hurt
anybody. How far could it go? Obviously it has to be
some limits on it. Sure.
Obviously also it had gone a little too far
sometimes.
I guess it was at about its height when I was here. I
don't mean because I was here, but in looking at the
situation it looked like it kind of peaked right
along in those years and obviously it isn't
anything like that now. No, not at all.
So, while I can't deny that I was mighty, mighty
happy when Fish Day came,
I can also say that I enjoyed every weapon I ever
got, except one or two, in which I thought things
were abused, and I got lots of them. Well, were you
sorry later on when they decreased the amount of
hazing? I mean, there's almost no hazing at A&M in a
physical sense, except for some push-ups, etc. In
a physical sense, there's essentially none,
that's right. Yes. Do you think that they should
have continued the board? No. I was a member of the
Century Council, and of course this question
received quite a lot of consideration.
And I had to vote for it going like it is going. In
other words, decreasing hands. Decreasing,
physically. Not because it was bad, but because
you can't get something as big as the school was
visualized to be on the course as it is. And have
these kind of things
going on in a routine way, because it's very
bigness kills its effectiveness and breeds
abuse.
At the time that I was talking about that I was here,
there were, I believe, five students on the campus
who were not in the